I don’t have to tell anybody here that we are living in a dangerous and unprecedented moment in American history. And our campaign is about several fundamental issues.

No. 1, it is absolutely imperative that we defeat the most dangerous president in the modern history of this country. And it seems to me that Donald Trump is getting a little bit nervous because, you may have noticed that in the last few days, he and his Republican lieutenants are focusing their anger against our campaign because they know what we know. And that is that we are the strongest campaign to defeat Donald Trump.

They know that we will expose Trump for the liar and the fraud that he is.

Now, I have friends and colleagues who hold different political views than I do. And that’s fine. We’re a democracy. But I have very little respect for somebody who campaigns in 2016 as a candidate who’s going to represent the interests of the working class of this country and then proceeds to sell them out.

You are not a supporter of working families when, as Trump attempted, you try to throw 32 million Americans off the health care they currently have. That’s not a friend of working families.

You are not a friend of working families when you tell the people that you are going to have a tax plan that benefits the middle class, and yet you pass legislation which gives 83 percent of the benefits to the top 1 percent.

You are not a friend of the working class of this country when you say during your campaign that you’re a different type of Republican, you’re not going to cut Medicaid, Medicare and Social Security, and that as president you bring forth a budget which calls for massive cuts to Medicaid, Medicare and Social Security disability fund. That’s not being a friend of the working class. That is being a liar.

And in addition to that, we have a president who goes around the country every day demonizing the undocumented. We’re supposed to hate the undocumented, and then as a businessperson, hires undocumented workers to work in his resort so he can exploit them. Trump runs for president telling us that he’s against outsourcing. He doesn’t want to see good jobs in America go abroad and yet as a businessman, he ran his companies in countries around the world where they were paying workers extremely low wages.

We are going to defeat Trump because our campaign is going to bring out more people and have the largest voter turnout than any campaign in the history of this country. And the only way, let’s be clear — Trump will be a very formidable opponent for a number of reasons — and the way you defeat Trump is talk to working people in this country who are so exasperated, so tired of working longer hours for lower wages, so tired of working for 10, 11, 12 bucks an hour and not being able to afford to maintain their family with the dignity that family deserves.

The way you beat Trump is to reach out to young people and get them involved in the political process in a way that we have never seen before.

[Mr. Sanders speaks about the support he had from young people in 2016.]

The reason we’re going to defeat Trump is because we tell the truth. And we talk about issues that other campaigns choose not to talk about. We talk about the fact that we have today a corrupt political system that allows billionaires to buy elections. Now I may be old-fashioned, but I kind of believe in democracy and one person, one vote.

And that is why together, we will overturn the disastrous Supreme Court decision on Citizens United.

Why together we will end voter suppression in America. We will end extreme gerrymandering in America. And we will move this country to public funding of elections.

But it is not only the political system which is corrupt. We have an economy which, in its essential components, is rigged in favor of the wealthy and the powerful.

Now we talk about it, a lot of other people don’t talk about it. But I think not only is it a moral outrage, but it is an economic and unsustainable situation when three people in America own more wealth than the bottom half of American society.

It is not acceptable that at a time of low unemployment, we still have half of our people living paycheck to paycheck.

You all know what living paycheck to paycheck is about? I grew up in a family that lived paycheck to paycheck.

When you live paycheck to paycheck and you get sick, or your kids get sick, you are worried to death about how you are going to be able to afford to take them to a doctor. When you live paycheck to paycheck and your car breaks down, you don’t go to your second car or your third car. You got to figure out how you can come up with the 500 bucks you need to repair that car because if you don’t get that car repaired, you don’t get to work. If you don’t get to work, you don’t have an income. If you don’t have any income, you can’t put food on the table for your kids.

In America today, unbelievably, we are seeing a decline in life expectancy. Did you all know that? Instead of living longer lives, we are actually as a people living shorter lives. And one of the reasons the doctors believe this is happening is because of what they call diseases of despair. When people give up on life, when they see no hope, they turn to drugs. They turn to alcohol, and too often, increasingly, they turn to suicide.

Our job is to give people hope, not despair. Our job is to have a government, which is not based on greed and hatred and divisiveness, but a government which is based on love and compassion and bringing our people together.

[Mr. Sanders takes a few moments to thank Ms. Tlaib “for all that you do.”]

Now the truth is, despite what the pundits will tell you and the media may tell you, politics is not all that complicated.

It is about taking a hard look at where we are as a people today, trying to understand how we got to where we are, and most importantly, having a vision of where we want to go. Where do we want to go?

And in that regard, I think of a phrase, a quote from the great, one of the great leaders of our lifetime, Nelson Mandela, who as you know, spent his life fighting apartheid in South Africa, existed in hard labor in jail for decades, and left jail to become president of South Africa. And what Mandela said, he said, “Everything seems impossible until it happens.” “Everything seems impossible until it happens.”

That’s a pretty profound phrase, and what he means by that is that we are told every single day: “It can’t happen. You can’t do this. You’ve got to settle for crumbs. You’ve got to settle a half-baked compromises. You can’t think big. It just can’t happen.”

But then after people struggle to make it happen — I want you to think back on the major changes in our country. Some of them are fantastic changes.

[Mr. Sanders gives several examples of when people rising led to change, including the women’s movement, the civil rights movement and the gay rights movement.]

The lesson there is that nothing ever really changes until millions of people stand up and fight for justice. And that is why the message of our campaign is “Us. Not me.”

And that’s not just a sexy bumper sticker — although it is a very good bumper sticker. It is actually a very profound statement in a few words because what that statement understands is that real change never takes place from the top on down. It’s always from the bottom on up.

And what I will tell you, and I don’t believe any other candidate will tell you, is that no president, not Bernie Sanders or anybody else, can do it alone. We cannot take on Wall Street alone, or the drug companies, or insurance companies, or the fossil fuel industry, or the military industrial complex or the prison industrial complex.

The only way that change takes place when people by the millions stand up and say, “You know what, this is not acceptable. We’re going to fight for justice in America.”

So this is not just a campaign for the presidency. This is a political movement, which tells the corporate elite and the 1 percent that in this country today, they will no longer be able to have it all, that this country belongs to all of us, not just the few.

So what does that mean? What does it mean in practical terms?

Not hard. We all know what it means. It means that in America, if you work 40 hours a week, you should not be living in poverty. Not a radical statement, and yet I have talked to, in the last few months, people right here in Iowa trying to get by on 9, 10 bucks an hour. Nobody gets by on 9 or 10 bucks an hour. We’re going to raise that minimum wage nationally to $15 an hour.

Women in America should not be making 80 cents on the dollar compared to men. They deserve the whole damn dollar.

We’re going to make it easier for workers to join unions. We have introduced legislation, which says that if 50 percent of the workers plus one in a bargaining unit sign a union card, they have a union. End of discussion. And that same legislation repeals section 14B of the Taft-Hartley Act, which will eliminate all so-called right-to-work laws in this country.

And when we talk about defending the working families of this country, it’s not only about creating jobs, but creating jobs that pay people good wages. And that is why we’re going to rebuild our crumbling infrastructure, our roads, our bridges, our water systems, our wastewater plants, our schools. We need millions of units of affordable housing in America. Let’s put our people to work building that housing.

And when we talk about the needs of working families, we have got to talk about education, because everybody knows that in this day and age, young people need a good education in order to make it into the middle class. It is not a radical idea to say that today, when we talk about free public education, we’re talking about making public colleges and universities tuition-free.

Eleven years ago, against my vote, Congress voted to bail out the crooks on Wall Street who nearly destroyed our economy. Gave them trillions of dollars of zero interest loans. Two years ago, Trump and his friends gave the 1 percent and large corporations a trillion dollars in tax breaks. Well, if you give tax breaks to billionaires, you know what else you can do? You can cancel all student debt in America. And we do that through a modest tax on Wall Street speculation.

And when you talk about standing up to the working families of America, you got to talk about probably the issue that is most in their minds and in their hearts. And that is a health care crisis.

Today in America, we remain the only major country on earth that does not guarantee health care to all people as a human right. Together, we are going to end that embarrassment.

Today in America, I want you all to hear this because we don’t discuss it enough. Today in America, we are spending twice as much per person on health care as do the people of any other country. Twice as much. And yet despite spending $11,000 for every man, woman and child in America, we end up with a system in which 87 million Americans are uninsured or underinsured. Where 30,000 people die each year because they don’t get to a doctor when they should because they’re uninsured, and amazingly enough, we have a system in which 500,000 people go bankrupt because of medically related debt.

I can understand, and you can understand, that if you go to some casino and you gamble away your money and you go bankrupt, that’s your responsibility. If you want to get involved in some risky business scheme and it doesn’t work out, and you lose your money, that’s your choice. You buy a house that you can’t afford, your choice. But people in America should not go bankrupt because they have cancer or heart disease. That is a moral outrage.

It is no secret, everybody knows it. Everybody knows what the function of health care today is — the function of our system. The system is not designed to provide quality care for all. It is designed to make huge profits for the drug companies and the insurance companies. Together, we are going to end that type of system.

[Mr. Sanders recounts a trip over the summer to Windsor, Ontario, to buy cheaper insulin for people with diabetes.]


We pay by far the highest prices in the world for the medicine that we need. The result? One out of five Americans cannot afford the medicine their doctors prescribe. How insane is that? You walk into a doctor’s office because you’re sick. The doctor writes out a script. You can’t afford to fill it. We have people who have serious accidents. The ambulance comes, and they say, “Don’t take me to the emergency room because I cannot afford to pay the bill.” It is disgusting. It is outrageous.

So let me be very clear. In my view, the function of a rational and humane health care system is to provide health care to all us in a cost-effective way, not to make the drug companies and the insurance companies $100 billion in profit.

Now, the idea of universal health care, guarantee of health care to all, is not a new idea.

Certainly not something that I thought of. It’s been an idea that has been talked about in this country for over 100 years. Teddy Roosevelt, a good Republican in the early 1900s, talked about universal health care. Franklin Delano Roosevelt, president in the ’30s and ’40s, talked about health care for all.

Harry Truman talked about health care for all. J.F.K. talked about health care for all. Lyndon Johnson talked about health care for all. Barack Obama talked about health care for all.

After 100-plus years of talking, now is the time for action. Now is the time, finally, to pass a Medicare for all single-payer program. And I want to tell you in a few moments, very briefly, what Medicare for all means because the health care industry will be spending hundreds of millions of dollars to misinform you.

So as somebody who wrote the damn bill, let me tell you what’s in the bill.

Medicare today is a very strong program, and it’s the most popular health insurance program in the country. But it is far from perfect.

So the first thing that we do is look at Medicare and say: “How can we expand it? How can we improve it?” So what we do on the Medicare for all is we increase benefits to include dental care. A lot of people in America cannot find affordable dental care. We include hearing aids. We include eyeglasses. And we also include home health care so that people are not driven from their home and forced to go to a nursing home. So we expand the benefits on the Medicare.

What else do we do? Well, so it’s a four-year transition period. First year, after expanding these benefits, we lower the eligibility age from 65, where it is now, down to 55. From 55 the next year down to 45. Third year, 45 down to 35. Fourth year, everybody is in a Medicare for all program. You see the doctor you want, go to the hospital that you want.

Now what does that mean in concrete terms? This is what it means. It means we eliminate all premiums, for you and for your employer. Now you can call it a premium, whatever you want — give it any term you want. I would call it a tax to the insurance companies. That’s my definition of a premium. That’s gone, for you and your employer. What’s gone is the co-payment that you now pay when you walk into a doctor’s office.

Then, when you take a step back, and you kind of look at the absurdity and dysfunctionality of the current health care system, you bump up against a concept, which is basically insane, called a deductible. Now we all take deductibles for granted. I’ve got a deductible. You got a deductible. But it is an insane concept because what it says is before your insurance policy kicks in, you’ve got to pay a certain amount of money out of your own pocket. Some deductibles are 2,000, some are 5,000, some are 7,000, some are 10,000, some are more than 10,000 dollars.

So what happens if you are a working-class person, and you don’t have a lot of money in your pocket and you get sick? You still can’t afford to go to the doctor because you’ve got this outrageous deductible. We on the Medicare for all eliminate all deductibles.

We eliminate all out-of-pocket expenses. And because we are going to take on the greed and corruption of the pharmaceutical industry and very substantially lower prescription drug prices in America, nobody in America will have to pay more than $200 a year for his or her prescription drugs.

So, two questions that we have to ask, having said that — people are sitting there thinking, “Well, that sounds pretty good. Very generous benefits, comprehensive health care.” And by the way, on your minds some of you are thinking, because I get this at every meeting: “What about the mental health crisis?” Of course, Medicare for all covers all mental health treatment.

So the next fair question is, how do we pay for health care today? How do we pay for it under Medicare for all? I’m not going to be dishonest with you. I can’t tell you that health care, which is pretty expensive, is free, no one’s going to have to pay anything for it. You wouldn’t believe me if I told you that. It’s not true. Right now we pay it out of premiums. Some of you are paying — correct me if I’m wrong — $500, $1,000 a month for premiums. Yes?

That’s how you’re paying for it now. And then you’re paying for it because you’ve got to pay a lot of out-of-pocket expenses because you’ve got to take out the deductible. You’ve got to pay for the prescription drug costs. You’re paying for health care a lot.

Now here’s the bottom line. The family in the middle of the American economy, kind of the average family, makes about $60,000 a year. That family pays $12,000 a year for their health care. $12,000 on an income of $60,000, 20 percent of their income goes to health care. You know what? That is pretty crazy. That is a lot of money. Some pay more, some pay less. But paying 20 percent of your income for health care is regressive, and it is wrong. Well, that’s how we’re paying for it today.

Our proposal raises money in a variety of ways, but most relevant to working people is the following. What we have is, we get rid of all the premiums and the co-payments, and the deductibles, the out-of-pocket expenses. That’s gone. But what we do do is have a 4 percent tax on income exempting the first $29,000. That means if you are that median family, a family right in the middle of our economy, making 60,000, you’ll pay 4 percent of $31,000, which is a little bit more than $1,200 a year for comprehensive health care. Pretty good deal.

[Mr. Sanders says it is hard to defend the current system.]

This is what the issue comes down to: Do we as a people finally have the courage to take on the insurance companies and the drug companies and tell them that health care is a human right, not something to be making billions of dollars over? That is really what the whole issue is about. And my promise to you is that as president of the United States, in my first week in office, we will introduce, we will fight, and we will succeed in creating a Medicare for all single-payer system.

Audience Bernie! Bernie! Bernie!

And I want you to know, again getting back to the Mandela quote, which says that everything is impossible until it happens. What I’m talking about here is not radical. Please understand it.

I live in Burlington, Vt., 50 miles away from the Canadian border. When you get sick, you end up in a hospital in Canada. Anybody here know what your bill is when you leave the hospital? Zero. You go to any doctor you want, you go to any hospital that you want. You don’t have to take out your wallet. You don’t have to take out your credit card. It is paid for out of a public tax system. It cost 50 percent per person compared to what we spent. So this is not a radical idea. The time is long overdue.

And when we pass Medicare for all, what does it mean?

[Mr. Sanders says the current health care system is forcing people to live “under great stress.”]

You’ve got millions of people in America, including some in this room, who are now working at jobs they don’t like, but they are on those jobs because they have decent health care coverage for their family. I think that’s absurd. When you have a health care system that guarantees health care to all people, you can go out and get the job or start your own business if that is what you want to do. You will have health care as an American right.

There’s another issue that I just want to say a few words about — and I wish I didn’t have to talk about it. And I wish I didn’t have to get you nervous. You’re nervous enough. But let me just tell you this: Anyone who tells you that climate change is not real or is a hoax is not only lying to you, but even worse, they are doing a massive disservice to their own children and their own grandchildren. You know, I am not a scientist. But unlike the guy who’s in the White House right now, I actually believe in science, and will listen to the scientists.

[Mr. Sanders says the next part will “get you nervous,” and jokes that his wife says it will make people depressed and he will have to start handing out “Prozac or something at the door.”]

Here is the truth. What the scientists are telling us now is that they have underestimated the degree, speed and severity in which climate change is ravaging not only our own country, but the world. That’s what they’re telling us.

And they are saying that we have a very short period of time, less than 10 years — not a long period of time — to boldly transform our energy system away from fossil fuel to energy efficiency and sustainable energy. And we have got to do it not only here in the United States. Guess what? We’re going to have to do it all over the world.

Now, what the scientists are telling us now: Polar caps are melting far faster than they thought. Ocean is warming faster than they thought. There’ll be rising sea levels, which if we don’t get our act together will mean by the end of the century that cities in America like Miami, New Orleans, Charleston, South Carolina, New York City and many others will be partially or completely underwater. It means that countries like China, like Vietnam, like other low-level countries, will see massive flooding in their nations.

What it means is that in states like Iowa, such an important bastion of agriculture for America, your farmers are going to have shorter growing seasons because of drought and extreme weather disturbances. That means less production of food, and the quality of that food being produced deteriorates.

It means we’re going to see more extreme weather disturbances. A couple of months ago you saw Venice, Italy underwater. Houston, Texas, underwater. Now we’re seeing, unbelievably, the apocalypse which is taking place in Australia, where you have that great and beautiful country literally on fire, and we saw something at a lower level devastating California. More drought, more fires.

What we are seeing is the spread of disease because bacteria do well when the weather warms. So you’ll see disease like malaria spreading beyond where it is right now.

And what you will see, according to the United Nations, is with more drought, more floods, more extreme weather disturbances — we will see well over 100 million climate refugees. People forced to leave their homeland because they can’t find water or land to grow their crops. And when you’ve got 100 million or more people on the move, you’re going to have real international crises. This is what we are looking towards.

And yet we have a president, and we have a major political party that not only is not beginning to address this existential crisis, they are making it worse by trying to bring forth more fossil fuel production. So on this issue, what we have got to do is not only transform the energy system of our own country. But we got to lead the world in that direction.

And my dream — I don’t know if it can happen or not — is that we are going to reach out to countries all over the world; China and Russia and India and Pakistan, Brazil, countries all over the world and say, to them, say to the people of those countries, that we are all in this together. No one is going to escape. China is going to be particularly hard hit by this. India going to be particularly hard hit by this. That instead, maybe, instead of spending $1.8 trillion a year, every year, on weapons of destruction designed to kill each other, maybe we pool our resources and fight our common enemy, which is climate change.

So the bottom line here is that our message to the fossil fuel industry, in this country and around the world, is that their short-term profits are not more important than the future of this planet.

[Mr. Sanders speaks of his support for the Green New Deal and praises the power of the younger generation in taking on climate change.]

I want to very briefly touch on some other issues that I know are on your mind. And you’ll forgive me if we can’t talk about all the issues, we’ll be here all night to do that, but this is what I want to say: As Americans, we should be profoundly embarrassed that in the richest country in the history of the world, we have more people in jail today than any country on earth. We have a criminal justice system, which is not only broken, it is a racist system. That’s just the way it is.

So what we are going to do is invest in our young people, in jobs and education, so the kids do not fall through the cracks. Jobs and education, not more jails and incarceration. And that means also ending private prisons and detention centers. It means ending the so-called war on drugs and legalizing marijuana in every state in this country. It means expunging the record of those arrested for possession of marijuana.

And when we talk about systems that are broken and racist, it’s not just criminal justice. It is the immigration system in this country. So our view, my view is, that instead of demonizing the undocumented, we are going to move to comprehensive immigration reform and a path toward citizenship for the undocumented. It means that on my first day as president, we will undo all of the racist immigration executive orders promulgated by Trump.

And that means re-establishing the legal status of the 1.8 million young people and their parents eligible for the DACA program. It means ending the current policies at the southern border so that under our administration, no federal agent will ever be grabbing babies from the arms of their mothers.

All of us are profoundly disgusted, when we turn on the TV, and we see another mass shooting. And we ask ourselves, “When does it end?” And it’s not only the deaths that we see, as horrible as that is. It is the fear that our children have.

I was in New Hampshire a number of months ago. A woman raised her hand and said, “Bernie, what am I supposed to tell my 11-year-old daughter, who wants me to buy her a bulletproof backpack for Christmas?” That’s how scared children are. Our gun safety policy will be determined by the American people, not by the N.R.A.

That means universal and expanded background checks. It means ending the so-called gun show loophole. It means ending the straw man provision. And by the way, it also means that the American people have now come together in rural states like Iowa and Vermont, urban areas, New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, with the understanding that we must end the sale and distribution of assault weapons in this country.

So together, together, we are going to do everything humanly possible to end the gun violence, which is such an epidemic in America today.

As a United States senator, I am often on the floor of the Senate.

[Mr. Sanders jokes that he would soon be spending more time on the Senate floor because of the impeachment trial but would “rather be here in Iowa.”]

When I’m down on the floor, I hear a lot of my Republican and conservative colleagues giving their speeches, and often they say: “You know, we are conservatives and we believe in small government. We believe in getting the government off the backs of the American people, etc., etc.” Well, I say to those senators: If you believe in getting the government off the backs of the American people, understand that it is women who have a right to control their own bodies, not politicians.

[Mr. Sanders segues to his conclusion by recapping the themes he has previously laid out — the power of insurance companies, the power of the fossil fuel industry.]

We know that as powerful as the 1 percent and the corporate elite are, and they are enormously powerful, that when the bottom 99 percent stands up and does not allow themselves to be divided up by Trump and his friends based on the color of our skin, or where we were born, or our religion or our sexual orientation — when we stand together around an agenda that works for all of us, no matter what the power of the 1 percent is, when millions stand up and fight back, there is nothing that will stop us. That’s what this campaign is about. That’s what our administration will be about.

Thank you.